That's one of those things that the military
shouldn't get into. You mean it was too political?
Too political? Yes. I'll illustrate that. I knew a
good many Britishers, I guess, if you gather, and I
knew what their point of view about it was, and that
was expressed by their government to Truman
directly. No part of it. They'd part company with
us if they did it. Of course, I knew that people
thought that it would lead Russia into war, and us
into war with Russia, and I knew the pros and cons of
that, but these are not questions which military
people should address themselves to. What did you
think of Truman's firing MacArthur? He had to. He
had no option. He had to. MacArthur stepped over
that line I was talking about. Yeah. Now, when were
you assigned to the headquarters of Europe? as
commander of the light bomber wing in France.
Well, I served in Europe headquarters before
that. I was assigned there to help arrange to get
what we now call tactical weapons into position
and so forth and so forth. And the opportunity came
to get out of that headquarters into an active unit
and I grabbed it. And when was this, early 1950s? I
guess so. Wait a minute, wasn't it 51? I came back in
54, so it had to be 51. Okay, so you were commander of
the light bomber wing in France from 1951 to 1954?
Look,
I spent six months roughly in Europe, I mean Europe
headquarters, and two and a half years roughly in
France. So it had whatever that adds up to. Was it at
this time when you were promoted to a Brigadier
General? No, I wasn't promoted until I came home.
And about how large was the command? It was a bomb
wing. It was the only one of its kind in NATO, but it
was a pleasure, particularly because of the It got
me away from these things that I'm not too talented
at anyway, away from the opposing forces and so on
that I mentioned earlier. At this time France of
course was still in NATO and later on by 61 they were
taken out of NATO. How were the relations between
the French and the Americans and the military? Oh
I'd say good.
It depended on where you were dealing. The
relations at the highest level were not very good
because it was totally political. The relations
that I had with my counterparts in the French Air
Force and the French Army were very good. In fact,
they were amicable. I entertained them at my base
in a goddamn lousy tent camp and they entertained
me in their chateau. But we were good friends and we
got along well and both of us got something out of
it. But the relationships in the parish was
something else because they were motivated a
different way. Now in this time when you were in
France, the United States was trying to
rejuvenate West Germany and they eventually
joined NATO too and we re-armed or helped re-arm
West Germany. What was your opinion of re-arming
West Germany? My opinion was we better goddamn
well do it if we wanted to defend Europe on that part
of it. Of course. But you see, at the time we're
fixed on here, that geography of France was a
backdrop. Now it's denied us.
But that's no reason to talk about that. See, I went
back to NATO after the next assignment and got
another slant at it.
NATO is never going to be out of trouble. I read the
papers and almost every year there will be
something about the drift in NATO or the schisms in
NATO. That's always the case and it always will be
the case. If you want to ask me whether or not I think
the United States puts too much into it, as of right
now I don't know. When I was there we did put too much
into it. I mean by that we put more into it than we had
to and it was extremely expensive.
Now you left the command of the light bomber wing.
This was your first wing command wasn't it? Well I
guess
This is the first tactical command I've had, yes.
How did you like that? How did you like it? Did you
enjoy being a commander? Of course I did. As a
matter of fact, the goddamn outfit still has
reunions. I had one not long ago. And I will say
this, see I remember one way in this Goddamn sit
around and tell the goddamn this lies. They'll all
act like now like they just had a wonderfully good
time. Well, Christ, it wasn't all that. They were
in the mud a lot. And God knows their wives didn't
enjoy it. My wife joined me there later. And she
hated every day of it. But those guys seemed to
think that was a great experience. I didn't worry
at all. See, we went everywhere. Being the only one
of our kind, we went all the way from Norway down to
Saudi Arabia. This had its disadvantages, but
also for a flying machine type, it was pretty good.
And we'd go down to North Africa and bomb up the
ranges and so forth.
I made myself very unpleasant and disliked, of
course. That's common for me. because my guys had
to carry around a handbag full of different kinds
of currencies and stupid bastards over in Germany
that never went anywhere. They kept us on a funny
money deal. For quite a script-type money, you
don't think you could buy a meal in Italy with it or
anywhere else for that matter, except right on a
base. But it was hell's own job trying to get it
through their heads that They were the pain in the
ass to us who had to move all the way across the
theater. The fighter outfits didn't. See, they
always came back to the home base right there. And
that was just one of the things that made me persona
non grata, I guess. But altogether, and as far as
the experience, working with the Americans and
with the French, it was good. Do you think that your
duty as the commander of that wing was one of the
main reasons why you were promoted to
generalship? I don't know. I
want to make another philosophical statement
about this.
When you're in the military, if you know how the
system works, and I did, Look, I've been in it a long
time.
You don't bother about things like that. The thing
is, you've got one person to answer to, and that's
yourself. If you feel like you're doing all right
and you're doing what's right, that's what
counts. And if you get promoted, fine. You don't
bother with it too much. Unfortunately, most
people aren't made that way. They think there's
something wrong with them. And that's very
painful. But I never bothered about that. I knew
how the system worked. Now, you went back to the
United States as deputy for personnel tactical
air command. Was that a Pentagon job? Oh, no. No, it
was headquartered then at Langley. Okay, at
Langley. I want to make one more statement about
this. By the time I was promoted to general, God
knows, there must have been probably 150 at least
men who had been junior to me who were promoted
before me. But by the time I was promoted the second
time, I was probably promoted over 300 men who were
senior to me. Did I make it clear why this thing
doesn't make so goddamn much difference as most
people seem to think it does? Okay.
Now at Langley, or during, this is, your next
assignment then was from about 1954 to about 1957,
probably. Four to 58, I believe it was. Okay, to
1958. Wait a minute, was it four years? Must have
been, that's what it was. Now as it was during this
time that the Strategic Air Command of course was
glamorized in America. There's even movies about
it and Curtis LeMay was the leader And I've heard
from other Air Force officers that there was some
contention between tactical and the strategic
air commands. Would you like to address that? Some
what? There were some problems. There was some
irritants. Oh, yes. There was friction. Yes, of
course there was. Would you? Well, I'll
illustrate it this way. Back when I was in the
training command in the same job,
that time when The Air Force was going to make a big
program change, or change of any consequence.
They called in senior officers, various
commands, and we were called in to look at the plan
under which the Strategic Air Command was going to
be established and run. Two men in the conference,
myself and one more, said this is probably going to
be a bomb idea. But it may not be. But one thing you
can be sure of, and that is you're going to
establish an Air Force within the Air Force,
separate and distinct. And that is going to cause
you some problems. And we went on back and exactly
set up that way. And what we said and how we did,
Whether it's justified or not, I'm not in a
position to judge. All I'm saying is that, yes,
there were problems. And when I got back to TAC, we
inherited them. It made for a situation in which
you found yourself necessarily in competition
with someone that you should not compete with.
That's still true. You knew Curtis LeMay for a
number of years before this time. We were
classmates in the flight school. What did you
think of him? Probably the best air commander or
combat situation we've ever had. Not necessarily
the attack. There were two others that were just as
good. Who were they? Pat Partridge and Opie
Weiler. LeMay was an extremely competent man.
Now, let me talk about it just a moment since you
asked the question. Way back when we were young in
the service, each of us had to qualify as a radio
operator, as a navigator, as an observer, as a
gunner, as a pilot. Of course, all of us were
pilots. When LeMay set out to do these things, he
set out to be the best, to be the best radio
operator, to be the best navigator, to be the best
man with a gun and all that sort of thing. And he
pretty goddamn well achieved that. I'll go one
step further to illustrate what I mean. When I
checked in his headquarters before I joined the
group which I flew with, and fact-stated his
headquarters there, so just to get the pitch. When
a first, a mission came in for debriefing, he was
then what they called a wing commander, later
called it a division, now they call it an air force,
but when they came in, you do a debriefing, you get
the story from, here's the lead pilot, here's the
lead navigator, here's the gunner, here's the,
and so forth. Now, it was self-evident in the
briefing that LeMay knew more about what these
people were doing than they knew themselves.
That's pretty impressive. He wasn't earnest
about it. It was just self-evident to anybody that
knew anything about how you run a show like that.
He's pretty good. He's got some god awful blind
spots, but who doesn't? He's good. What did you
think his blind spots were? One of them, and this
applies more earlier than it did later, but it
applied at the time he took over the Air Force. He
wasn't
I don't know whether the right word is sensitive or
whether he just planned to give it down, about the
fact that people aren't all alike and they never
will be. He was pretty severe to some people that
had a lot to contribute. That's what I would call
his mind spot, his principal one. He mellowed in
his later years, he mellowed quite a lot. In fact,
I'm reminded of a man who I knew pretty well that had
gone to a commander's conference down in the
Caribbean not too long after LeMay took over. And
he came back just like that. God damn, I don't
understand it. He said, I used to be scared of that
son of a bitch that I'd run and leave the room to
avoid him. He's just as kind and gentle as he can be.
The fact of the matter was, LeMay got what he
wanted. He didn't have to be that way anymore. He's
a good guy, and God knows, you don't find many like
him.
I don't know anything about him now, I haven't seen
him in years, but I suspect he's probably not in
very good health. Now the Tactical Air Command,
was your mission training?
Well, not really. Not just that. Basically, in
peacetime, that is your mission. So I can't say,
no, it wasn't. Of course it is. But we had to build up
units. We had to deploy them. We had
what they now call this rapid deployment force.
It's been in being a long time. I don't know why the
newspapers say it's brand new, but it isn't. We had
to get all this done, and then when the Air Force
budget got cut, we had to cut it all back and
readjust and all that. I'm talking about the
headquarters job. And all the time, at least my
job, was to see to it that the right people were in
the right place. It's rewarding, particularly By
that time, you see, I knew a hell of a lot of people. I
knew something about anybody, any colonel, for
example, who might be coming into the command or
leaving it. If I didn't know him personally, I knew
something about him. And it's useful to even... if
necessary, to bend the rules a little bit to see to
it that the right guy gets in the right place.
Everybody benefits, you know, when this happens.
He does, and the unit does, everybody does. And
when you get the wrong guy, so much for that. It's a
good type of job. Okay. Now your last job, you were
assigned as Chief of Staff of the Allied Air Force
in Southern Europe. And so that was from 1958 to
1961. At this time you were a two-star general?
Now,
were relations with the French starting to sour?
You must have dealt quite a bit with NATO and the
French.
Oh,
the French kind of got on me for what it did for them,
I guess they liked me all right. Did I hear your
question? I don't know what you, I'm not sure. Were
relations between, during these last three years
from 58 to 61, were relations between the American
Air Force and the French Air Force starting to
sour? That wasn't the way of it. Oh, okay. About the
time I got back there, I mean got back to NATO, mind
you I'd had to go back and forth God knows how many
times I've been in Europe while I was stationed at
Langley. I don't remember a lot on business. So it
wasn't totally unfamiliar with me, but about the
time I got back, De Gaulle was just taking over. And
France was right on the verge of civil war. I mean
right on the brink of the civil war. Or the Algerian
affair. Yes. I know this because I had some friends
of French officers who informed me of it. It was
close. Now, the
fact that de Gaulle wanted us out of France and
France out of NATO had to do with his idea of the
grandeur of France. Now look, don't get me wrong,
de Gaulle was a great man. He was one of the great men
of our century. But he was great for France. He
didn't give batshit about the United States or
Britain or Yugoslavia or anywhere. It was la belle
France. And he did what he thought was right for
France. Maybe he's right, maybe he's wrong, I
don't know.
The fact of the matter is that NATO as a fighting
outfit is just about the same. You're going to get
about as much out of the French Air Force as you got
when it was in NATO. It's not going to be
appreciably different. So, I don't know how to
answer your question. Okay, okay.
What were your duties as Chief of Staff? Damn
little... keeping the peace mainly. I think, on
retrospect, I thought, well, here's something,
here's an old guy that we might as well give him a
pleasant place to live for his last few years. That
may have been it. But I came back to retire. I wasn't
doing anything worth much. And I was told, God damn
it, shut up and go on back. And I found out, I guess,
when I got back, that somebody in Punggol knew
something I didn't, I guess. And there was
something to do, but it was quite different from
what I had done in the past.
I think I did a good job, but as far as work, no.
I spent my time interested, when I found out I was
going to have to stay out of my term, diving in the
Mediterranean. That was fascinating. Scuba
diving. But in terms of duty, I
guess the thing could be described as trying to
prevent fires, trying to prevent problems from
happening. Dog simple. Why'd you retire? Why did
you retire? Well, officially I retired for
physical disability, but actually I was coming up
for mandatory retirement pretty quick anyway.
Were you ready to retire from the service? Oh, yes.
Of course.
You see, there's a time for everything, as the poem
says. I'd
lost my love affair with airplanes. I flew them.
But damn business on the ground had gotten so
complicated, and there was so much red tape, and
I'm here, and I'm going to be there, and all this
reporting to half a dozen stations. It wasn't much
fun for me anymore. It was totally different from
what I had started back when I had the love affair
with airplanes. That was in it. And shoot, you
don't want to stay in that kind of racket too long. I
don't mean by that I enjoy retirement. I don't at
all. Never had. Never expected. I much preferred
the active life that I had, but I certainly knew it
was time to retire. No question about that.
I'll make one more statement about Naito, and I'll
illustrate it again. Another guy from Texas A&M,
he was one of my students in the flying school. I've
known him ever since. He was a hell of a good man. I
came home and needed somebody to be my exec and
asked him if he wanted the job. He said he was
delighted to get it. So he brought his family over
there. The first thing I did, he came out of the Air
War College, and I know what he'd been taught
there. Send him out to find out under what exact
terms the nations in NATO would go to war. And he
came back shaking his head, and I can't believe it.
I did it on purpose. This is a common sense guy that
has to understand that he's an Alice in Wonderland
situation. It's through the looking glass. You
see it that way. On this side, you see it the other
way. That's NATO. That's the best simple
explanation I can give for it. What was his answer?
What did they say? Every goddamn one of them has a
different will. Here's what the treaty says. An
attack on one is an attack on all.
The United States doesn't say that. Neither does
any other country in NATO. That's what the treaty
says. Mm-hmm.
In some circumstances this would be true, in
others it wouldn't. That's NATO.
NATO as an intelligence situation couldn't be
worse. It's an absolute sieve. Anything by way of
an order, NATO order, is automatically available
to the other side. And you know this. This is one of
the things that you have to deal with. But Larry
Norstad is a genius. He's an absolute genius. Who
is this now? Norstad, who is the commander who's
been in NATO ever since it started. He's an
absolute genius in understanding these things
and coping with them.
I used to think, all right, if we have a war, who's
coming over to run the war? And I had a pretty good
idea. It would have been either Partridge or
Weiland, because Larry's genius does not extend
to that particular type of duty, but for that duty,
you couldn't have had a better man. De Gaulle said
as much.
I'm just trying to illustrate the nature of that
type of duty. Now let's talk a little bit about some
major changes in the military that we've had over
the last, well since the 1950s. One was we, the
military, and I'd just like your opinion on it. I
know that you weren't involved with a lot of these
things, but that's all right. I'd just like your
opinion. One was ending the Selective Service,
the draft, and now having a volunteer army. What do
you think of that?
I'm sorry, but I have to give you my point of view.
That's what I want. This is a political question. A
military person does his best to live with
whatever the politicians give him. To put it
another way, there are advantages to both sides.
And you live with compromise, whatever the
politicians say it should be. There are obvious
advantages to one or the other. I've lived with
both. Mm-hmm. What do you think of the increased
number of women in the armed forces?
One of my best friends among the women in the
service is the first woman to be head of the Air
Women, Gina Holmes. She was my diving partner in
the Mediterranean. If I was in a firefight, I'd
just as soon have Gina as anybody I know. That's
about as high a compliment as I can give. On the
other hand, if it was a long slog out,
she just simply doesn't have the physical
stamina.
She'd deny that. She's a good athlete, but this is a
fact of life. She has done more for the Air Force
than anybody ever. to increase utilization and
the wider spread utilization of women in the Air
Force. Jeannie's retired, of course, but she's a
major gentleman. Well, she finished. First one we
ever had. Boy, she's worth it. I hope I'm making
myself clear. I don't want to call that gal down. I
say, if I was in a firefight, I'd just as soon have
her as any man I've ever been with, and I've been
with some damn good men. But there's more to that.
Also, in a complex staff situation, no problem
with her. The only problem I see with women in the
service is this god-awful situation, you get him
now and then, that requires a hell of a lot of
physical stamina, and don't get me wrong, all men
don't have it either. Right. So, that's about all I
can say. Okay. What do you think about the
increased number of black Americans and
integration of units in the service?
One of my best friends in the service, not really,
but a very good friend in the service was Benno
Davis, who was the first black general, finished
as a lieutenant general. One of the best men I've
ever known. Benno put his whole self on the line,
his whole career, everything, on a on a premise.
This is way back, not too long after the war. You
treat everybody alike regardless of his color.
Everybody takes the same exam. Everybody takes
the same requirement. And the black men that can't
hack it, get out. The white men that can't hack it,
get out. Ben couldn't have been righter. He's
absolutely right. As long as we in the Air Force
were able to follow that, and mind you, it was a hell
of a lot to overcome before we could. And I was
there. We were in clover. There was no such thing as
a Negro problem. Unfortunately, that couldn't
last, because you know what happened. The Civil
Rights Program came along. The laws were changed.
And the worst thing you can do is to give a Negro
soldier or a Jew soldier or a Spanish soldier an
idea that he has certain rights because of his
color. That has happened, and it's a tragedy.
That's the worst feature of it. As long as
everybody is treated just the same, to the same
standards, by God, you don't have a problem.
except, of course, with the ignorant bigots. And
you can't get rid of ignorant bigots. You always
have them. But you can make them come to terms with
it as long as they're all meeting the same
standards. But when somebody gets a special right
that he shouldn't have, you've got trouble.
I'll illustrate that. Hell, the place that I've
set up, built, and commanded first, Laredo before
they closed it. Had some Negroes, and this was
since I retired, come into a mess hall and inhabit
it just as though it was a mutiny and defy the people
because they felt not that they were being
discriminated out there, because they were
discriminated in town. Now, nobody has the right
to come in and take over a mess hall. If he's got a
bitch, he's got a right to bitch. But when that
happened, the commander was unable to do what I
would have done, and could have done, in the same
circumstance. He had to send for a negotiator, a
negro, a master sergeant, assigned for that
purpose at his headquarters to come down and
negotiate with those men. This ain't good.
I don't want to weigh in on that problem too much,
I've lived with it when it was a damn sight better.
It's pretty simple, once you can get people to get
it through their heads and do it, to treat
everybody just exactly alike.
Make them all meet the same standards for
promotion, for pay, for rank, for whatever. No
problem. There's the most unfortunate feature of
it, which you're well aware of, When you're
dealing with very large numbers of people, you're
going to find out that the IQ rating on a very large
number, the lower ones are going to turn out to be
Negroes, disproportionate to their numbers in
the population. I don't want to go into that
because I know the exceptions to it. People like
Ben.
Ben is quite a man.
The other one who reached high regard, his dad died
of a heart attack, used to command the Air Defense
Command, Chappie, Chappie James. He was a
four-star general when he retired. That was the
man that saved him and put him on the right track.
Chappie was a damn good man, too. But when he was a
wheeler-dealer radical, he had to get
straightened out and learned that he had to live to
the same standards that other people did. Ben
taught him that. By God, look what happened. He
ended up as a four-star general. So this can be
done. There's no Negro problem if you treat
everybody alike. The problem comes up when you
start elevating a white man because he's white or
elevating a black man because he's black. That's
where the problem is. But I don't think this
country is going to change about that. Let's drop
it. Okay. Let's go to leadership. Oh, that's the
word that military people use the most and nobody
can define. I know what I think it is. What do you
think it is? I've already described it. It's what I
learned down in ROTC. That's what I think. But
there comes a time When it means something else.
When it means something else. Something you don't
learn in A&M. What time is that? At a higher rank.
Well what does it mean then? What does it mean then?
Yeah, at higher rank. It means a different kind of
talent.
It means an ability to to deal with your peers, not
with your subordinates, because leadership is
generally thought of as being able to deal with and
lead your subordinates. But leadership in the
higher ranks means an ability to deal with your
peers and to, as it were, lead them whether or not
they want to be led. And it's quite a different
proposition.
think, I don't know whether that observation did
any good. Now let's talk a little bit, final topic
here. Let's talk a little bit about the changes
over the last 20 years at Texas A&M. Now I know you
weren't involved with those changes, but you must
have some opinions on them. For example, we ended
the mandatory Corps of Cadets. Do you think that's
good or bad for A&M? What's your opinion? The
difference was good or bad or not, it had to be done.
I can speak a little bit on this, because I was
working for that Governor Connelly's commission
at the time. This had to be done. And one of the men I
admired beyond reason was Earl Rudder. I don't
think anybody else could have done it. Earl Rudder
had to do that, and he had to see to it that the women
got in there. Both of those things had to be done.
All you had to do was to lay out the problem, which is
what I was helping to do. I was dismayed, I must
admit, but Rudder was in no way dismayed. He knew
what had to be done. He did it. If he hadn't been the
kind of man he was, A&M would have had hell.
I'm very much admired. Sorry he's dead. What was
your role in that? What was your role in that?
Nothing really. I was trying to get things
together for the commission.
In the process I learned some things I'd rather not
know. In fact that was one of them. I didn't realize
until I began to deal with this that
NM was as far behind the times as it was. And I didn't
realize, see, my, if I know anything much, it's how
to deal with figures. For example, I deal with the
stock market now, and that's the easiest way to
make money I've ever run across, honestly. I know
what cost effectiveness is because I do. I was
really shocked to see what the
cost-effectiveness factor of Texas A&M was when I
got into it. And the things that Rudder did had to be
done because of that. There's no other reason.
I thought, because I was in it, that the old ROTC
system at A&M was good.
You couldn't do it. You couldn't do it and
discharge your responsibilities to the people of
the state of Texas. Do you follow me? Yeah. That's
why it had to be done. I won't argue the good or bad
features of it had to be done. Same with allowing
women and blacks into Texas. Same thing.
Same thing. hope, and it's nothing but hope, that
the scholastic standards can be kept up. I don't
really know. You see, when I went there, you got a
tremendous influx every fall, and then they start
going home, just like that. In other words, the law
required that they take them, but the law didn't
require that they keep them. When the guy got out of
there, whether he was in animal husbandry or
whether he was in civil engineering, you knew
goddamn well he knew certain things that you had to
know or he didn't get out. I hope that's still true.
It can be, but it depends. I don't know. I don't
know. I just don't know anything about the school
now. I hope so.
I think probably so, but that's a guess. What
little bit I'm able to gather from the various
reports I read. You're in a better fix to answer
that question than I am. Well, I'm about exhausted
the questions that I have. No, I meant whether or
not the standards of the institution are still
high. I think they are. Hope so. I think we just
raised the entrance standards. I heard that. Back
then, you see, they didn't have the entrance
standard problem. Say, I've got one more thing
that goes back a long way. It has to do with the
education and the military person. I had a
contemporary who was a little bit ahead of me in
flying school who became One of the Air Force's
best aeronautical engineers.
You would never guess that he graduated from East
Texas State Teacher's College. You know goddamn
well they didn't teach him anything about that.
But when he died, he was crashed, of course. He was
on his way to command that test facility out there
at Edwards. And there's no flies on him. He learned
what he had to learn in the Air Force, I mean about
the technology. So it ain't necessarily so that
you have to get a lot of this crammed in your head in
college. Okay, finish. Well, I'm done with the
questions. Is there something else that you...
No, God almighty, I'm sorry I kept you so long. No,
is there something about your career that I might
have missed? No, I think you covered more of it than
you should have. Okay.